                       PERIYAR E.V.RAMASAMY
                           A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH


1879 Sep-17      PERIYAR E.V. RAMASAMY was born at Erode town in Tamil
                 Nadu State - India
                 Father : VENKATA (NAICKER)
                 A popular rich merchant; Ardent devotee of Hindu religion. (A
                 Vaishnavite)
                 Mother : CHINNA THAYAMMAL alias
                 MUTHAMMAL
                 Brother-Elder        : E.V. KRISHNASAMY
                 Sisters-Younger : K A N N A M M A L ;
                                    P O N N U T H O Y
1885 Age - 6   * He was sent to a small primary school normally run at a House -
                 pial in those days.
1889 Age - 10 * His school career ended within 5 years.
1891 Age - 12 * He entered into his father’s trade.
1895           * He used to hear Tamil Vaishnav religious Gurus talks on
                 mythologies at his house, enjoying their hospitability. As a boy,
                 he started questioning the contradictions and illusions in the
                 fables of Hindu deities spread by the Aryan Race ie., Brahmins
                 for subjugating Dravidian Race.
               * Blossoming of rationalism and atheism slowly in the brain of
                 this youth - Ramasamy.
1898           * He married NAGAMMAL, aged 13.
               * He reformed his orthodox wife and sowed rationalistic views in
                 her mind.
1900             He became the father of a female - child which expired within 5
                 months and thereafter he had no children.
1904           * He undertook “renunciation” of family because of the harsh
                 reprimand by his father.
               * He went first to Vijayawada in Andhra State. Then he proceeded
                 to Hyderabad and Kolkatta.
INSULT AT KAASI ENLIGHTENS HIS RATIONALISM
  * He reached Kaasi (Varanasi), a noted sacred town of Hindu
    pilgrimage on the bank of the River Ganges. There he could not
    get free meals easily at choultries which exclusively fed
    Brahmins forbidding other Hindu castes.
  * Having starved severely for some days, this handsome young
    man Ramasamy found no other better way than to enter a
    choultry with the appearance of a Brahmin wearing a thread on
    his bare chest. But his moustache betrayed him. So the gate-
    keeper not only prevented his entry but also pushed him rudely
    to the street.
  * At that moment, as the feast was over inside the choultry, the
    leaves with food left over were thrown at the street.
    The unbearable burning of starvation for the past few days
    forced Ramasamy to compete with the street - dogs in eating the
    remnants of food in the leaves.
  * While eating that food, the eyes of Ramasamy looked at the
    letters carved at the frontal wall of the building. They revealed
    the truth that the choultry exclusively occupied by the highest
    caste viz., Brahmins, had been built only by a wealthy merchant
    of Dravidian Race from Tamil Nadu.
  * Suddenly in the mind of this young man, some questions could
    have sparked such as:
    “Why and how the Brahmins can obstruct the Dravidians from
    taking meals in the choultry although the choultry was built with
    the money of a Dravidian Philanthropist? Why the Brahmins
    behaved so mercilessly and fanatically as to push the
    communities of the Dravidian race even to starvation - death by
    adamantly enforcing their evil casteism?”
  * No justifiable answers came to convince the judicious thinking
    of Periyar on the above questions.
  * The disgrace inflicted by the Brahmins at KAASI upon him
    without the least mercy, made a deep wound in the heart of
    Periyar and it inflamed intense hatred towards that Aryan race
    and their creation of innumerable Gods.
              * Though Kaasi (Varanasi) has been acclaimed as the most “sacred
                town” by the Brahmins, the worst ugly scenes of immoral
                activities, prostitution, cheating, looting, begging crowds for
                alms, floating dead bodies on the River Ganges turned Periyar to
                abhor that so-called holy-town. Consequently, a re-thinking on
                his renunciation led him to return to his family life.
              * On returning to Erode - his father delegated all his trade rights to
                this second son and renamed his major commercial concern
                under the title: “E.V. Ramasamy Naicker Mandi”
                     SELFLESS SOCIAL SERVICES
1905 onwards * Besides being a well-known wealthy businessman in Erode Mr.
               E.V.R. entered into public life by rendering social services
               selflessly.
              * One noteworthy instance: Once the dreadful contagious disease
                plague attacked Erode. Hundreds of people died and thousands
                fled for saving their life. But this noble man did not desert his
                native town like other rich merchants. He himself carried the
                dead bodies on his back to the cremation ground while even the
                close kith and kin did not touch the expired persons for last rites
                due to the fear of the contagion of the plague disease.
              * He commanded enormous influence over other traders in the
                bazaar street of Erode. He mediated and solved many disputes
                among the businessmen with neutrality and uprightness.
                 FRIENDSHIP OF TAMIL SCHOLARS
1905-06       * In his youthful years he was attracted by the Tamil scholar
                Pandithamani Ayothidhaasar who vehemently condemned the
                caste - system and Hindu religion of Brahmins with the
                principles of rationalism and Buddhism.
              * There was a Tamil Scholar by name: PULAVAR
                MARUDHAIYA PILLAI at Karur. His logical arguments and
                daring condemnation of Hindu religion, caste-system, deceptive
                myths in the epics and Vedic sasthras (Hindu Dogmas) spread by
                the Brahmins, had attracted admiration of even the ordinary rural
                people in the areas around Erode and Karur.
                His bosom - friendship played a major role in inculcating
                atheism firmly in the mind of Periyar and in moulding the latter
                as a probing rational thinker.
         Intimacy of another Tamil Scholar Sage KAIVALYAM had also
         enriched the rational intuition of Periyar.
         Many higher officials and learned persons like Engineer P.V.
         MANICKA NAICKER befriended this Erode Beacon, because
         of his kindling progressive views.
1909   * Unyielding to stiff protest of orthodox family members, Periyar
         arranged the remarriage of his sister’s daughter who became a
         child widow at the age of 9.
       SACRIFICES FOR FREEDOM MOVEMENT
1918   * He became the Chairman of Erode Municipality
       * Despite his intense hatred towards the Hindu religion and its
         caste - system - particularly the cruel ‘Untouchability’ exerted by
         the Brahmins to suppress the Dravidian race - the executive
         efficiency and the unshakable honesty of E.V.R. fetched the
         awards of many posts in various public institutions.
       * Periyar was made Honorary Magistrate by the British
         Government.
       * He held many honorary positions like the President, the
         Secretary, Vice-President etc., in various public institutions
         numbering 29 such as - District Board, Taluk Board, Urban
         Bank, Religious Davasthanam (Trust), Public Library, War
         Recruitment Committee, Association of Agriculturists,
         Association of Merchants, Mahajana School Committee... etc.,
       * Many essential welfare schemes were implemented effectively
         by him. Particularly the drinking water scheme was skilfully
         executed.
1918   * While Periyar was the Chairman of Erode Municipality,
         friendship blossomed between himself and MR. C.
         RAJAGOPALACHARIYAR (Rajaji) who later became
         Governor - General of India.
1919   * Mr. P. VARADHARAJULU NAIDU and Mr. C.
         Rajagopalachariyar persuaded Periyar to join the National
         Congress party led by MR. M.K. GANDHI.
         Resigning the Chairmanship of Erode Municipality, Periyar
         enrolled himself as member of that Congress party.
1920   * He      ardently    participated    in      the       Non-
         Co-operation movement launched against the British rule by
         ‘Mahatma’ Gandhi.
         On the latter’s clarion call, Periyar resigned all the 29 public
         positions held by him. He gave up the family trade and closed
         the business concern which was earning Rs. 20,000 annually (in
         those days) when the price of a single gold sovereign was not
         even Rs. 10!.
       * He defied the prohibitory order of section 144, promulgated at
         Erode for the first time and courted arrest.
       * Periyar trusted and accepted Mahatma Gandhi as his leader.
         So, as a true disciple he began to execute every word of Gandhi
         into deed.
         One such example is Khadhi yarn spun by hand with Chakra. As
         soon as the command of Gandhi for wearing Khadhi cloth was
         announced, Periyar immediately shed away all his costly foreign
         clothes and began to wear Khadhi. Also he forced all the
         members of his family, including his mother, aged 80 years to
         wear Khadhi dress only!
       * Forsaking pomp hitherto enjoyed, Periyar implicitly enforced
         simplicity in every aspect of his life-journey.
        UPHOLDER OF PROHIBITION POLICY
1921   * The policy of Prohibition of Liquors was first conceived only at
         the house of Periyar. When Gandhi came to Erode and stayed at
         his residence, his wife Nagammal and his sister Kannammal
         explained unbearable agony of the wives tortured by their
         drunkard husbands and strongly stressed to draw a policy on
         prohibition of liquors. They also pleaded to launch an agitation
         in this regard.
       * Their worthy suggestion was accepted at once by Gandhi. He
         announced that the Congress party men should undertake
         picketing in front of toddy shops throughout the country for
         urging the British Government to implement the policy of liquor-
         prohibition.
       * To accomplish the command of Gandhi for upholding the policy
         of liquor - prohibition, Periyar had cut and uprooted more than
         500 coconut - trees in his vast groves, from which toddy was
         procured. Such was his commitment to prohibition
1921   * At Erode, Periyar was leading the agitators and picketed before
         the toddy - shop.
         He was arrested and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for one
         month.
1922   * His wife Nagammal and Sister Kannammal also bravely jumped
         into the agitation and they led women volunteers for picketing in
         front of liquor-shop.
       * When some Congress front-line leaders requested ‘Mahatma’
         Gandhi to stop that agitation, he seriously told them that such a
         decision of stopping the agitation was not at the hands of himself
         but of two women at Erode, implying the wife and the sister of
         Periyar!
       PRESIDENT OF TAMIL NADU CONGRESS
       * Then, Periyar became the President of Tamil - Nadu Congress
         Committee.
       * At the provincial conference of that party held at Tiruppur, he
         moved a resolution which urged that all the ‘Untouchables’ of
         Dravidian race, should be allowed to enter the temples for
         worship. But the Brahmins of the Congress Committee
         obstructed the passing the resolution.
         Provoked by their frenzy of caste - ‘Varuna Dharma’ Periyar
         declared that he would burn ‘Manusmiruthi’, ‘Ramayana’, etc.,
         because these had been utilised by the wily Brahmins, as their
         religious weapons to suppress the Dravidian race with evil caste
         and superstition.
1923   * The Government of Justice Party headed by Raja of Panagal
         passed an Act in the Madras State Legislative Council to create
         the Hindu Religious Endowment Board to end the exploitation of
         the Brahmins in Hindu temples.
         Though he was a Congress leader, Periyar supported that
         legislation brought by the Justice Party Government, due to his
         sincere concern for securing social justice as well as the rights of
         education, employment, economy, etc., to the Dravidian race
         oppressed by the Hindu Aryans.
                   FIGHTER FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE
1924          * Periyar appreciated the measures of the Justice Party
                Government for implementing the policy of Communal
                Reservation in education and employment through Government
                Order.
1924          * To abolish the cruel system of ‘Untouchability’ sternly observed
                by the Brahmins as a mode of oppressing the Adhi-Dravidas (the
                lowest of the Hindu Castes) like slaves - Periyar daringly led the
                agitation at VAIKOM town in Kerala State defying the
                prohibitory law order.
              * In the temple town of Vaikom, the low caste people (Ezhavas)
                were not allowed to walk in the streets around the temple. So
                that ‘Sathyagraha’ - agitation was started by local Congress party
                people.
              * They requested Periyar to come from Tamil Nadu to take up the
                leadership of Sathyagraha. He led the agitation. Hence, he was
                arrested and sent to jail. In that case, he was sentenced twice to
                undergo imprisonment for six months for each term. The
                Sathyagraha went on for one year.
                Then the streets were thrown open to the Untouchables.
              * That courageous social sacrifice and fight for the human rights,
                secured victory. The title of honour as ‘Hero of Vaikom’ was
                conferred on Periyar.
1924-Sep. 11 * He was awarded jail sentence for his earlier propagation for
               Khadhi cloth and for boycott of the foreign goods imported by
               the British Rule.
1924          * Discrimination was shown by V.V.S. Iyer, a Brahmin in charge
                of the National Training School hostel called ‘Gurukulam’ at
                Cheranmaadhevi near Thirunelveli, between the students of
                Brahmin caste and the Non- Brahmin castes, although that
                hostel-attached institution was funded by Tamil Nadu Congress
                Committee and also by Dravidian philanthropists.
                V.V.S. Iyer’s caste-oriented approach in favour of the Brahmin
                students segregating the Dravidian students with caste-
                fanaticism, infuriated Periyar. Hence this Great humanist
                resigned the post of Secretary of Tamil Nadu Congress
                Committee.
                * However Periyar was then elected as the President of Tamil
                  Nadu Congress Committee.
                  He presided over the provincial conference of the Congress party
                  held at Tiruvannamalai in November - 1924.
                * Since 1920, he had been moving a resolution in Congress
                  conferences demanding the Communal Reservation in
                  Government      jobs and education for the Non-Brahmins
                  (Dravidians) to drive out their degradation and attain higher
                  positions in all spheres of life on par with the dominating
                  Brahmins. Similarly he proposed such a resolution at
                  Tiruvannamalai Congress Conference also.
                  But it was defeated by the Brahmins as they plotted at the
                  Conferences of Tirunelveli (1920), Thanjavur (1921), Tiruppur
                  (1922) and Salem (1923).
1924            * Speaking at a public meeting at Salem, Periyar cautioned that
                  unless the right of communal representation for the Non-
                  Brahmins was attained during the British Rule itself, the
                  Brahmin supremacy could not at all be ended and the Dravidian
                  race had to suffer under the tyranny of ‘BRAHMNOCRACY’
                  (The “Hindu” Centenary Special Number: page 337). Thus he
                  even coined that new word.
1925 - May 2:     Periyar published a Tamil Weekly under the title “KUDI
                  ARASU” edited by himself to spread the principles of Self-
                  Respect for the awakening of the Dravidian race against the
                  oppression by the Brahmins with their cruel caste - system and
                  superstition of Hindu Religion.
                * The first issue of ‘Kudi Arasu’ was released by the reputed
                  Tamil Religious Scholar and eloquent orator by name
                  Thiruppathiripuliyur - GNANIYAR SWAMYGAL.
1925 - Nov.:    * Again at the Congress conference held at Kancheepuram under
                  the Chairmanship of the great versatile Tamil author, editor,
                  orator and labour leader THIRU. VI. KALYANA
                  SUNDARANAR, (Thiru. Vi. Ka.), the resolution was introduced
                  demanding Communal Reservation for 50% for the Non-
                  brahmins by Periyar .
                * As usual, the cunning Brahmins stalled its passage. That defeat
                  enraged Periyar to such a brink of hatred as to quit the Congress
               Party, the hierarchy of which was completely captured and
               dominated by the Brahmins.
             * While bidding farewell to the Congress, Periyar thunderously
               vowed that his only future task was to destroy that Brahmin Raj
               in party by all means. On his leaving the conference, a large
               group of front line leaders and volunteers also followed him.
            FOUNDER OF SELF-RESPECT MOVEMENT
1925 December *       At the same town Kancheepuram, Periyar organised
              shortly a parallel conference of Non-Brahmins.
               In his address, Periyar declared that the difference of racial
               identity between the Dravidians and the Aryans (Brahmins) had
               always been existing from very ancient times and its prevalence
               in the Congress Party also could not at all be denied. Therefore,
               he stressed the compelling need of the Dravidians to preserve the
               SELF-RESPECT of their race, language, and culture which had
               been degraded by the Brahminical dominance of their caste-
               system and superstition of Hindu religion.
             * Thus Periyar founded the SELF-RESPECT MOVEMENT in
               1925 after his exit from the Congress Party.
1926         * He participated in many Non-Brahmin Conferences held at
               various places of Tamil Nadu and propagated the principles of
               his SELF-RESPECT Movement to kindle the awakening of the
               Dravidian race for freeing themselves from the slavery enforced
               by Brahmins.
1927         * Periyar met the Congress leader M.K. Gandhi at Bangalore and
               strongly argued that unless the poisonous caste-system called
               ‘Varnashrama Dharma’ was uprooted, the eradication of the
               ‘Untouchability’ stubbornly practised by the Brahmins could not
               at all be made possible.
               He also emphatically told Gandhi that before fighting for the
               freedom of India, three threatening evils - viz., (1) The Congress
               Party (Under the command of more Brahmin office - bearers),
               (2) Hindu religion with its caste - system and (3) the Dominance
               of Brahmins in the society should be put an end to first.
                * When the strike of the workers of the Railway workshop at
                  Nagappattinam broke out, Periyar, as the supporter of labourers
                  was arrested and sent to jail.
                * With the active support of Periyar, Mr. S. MUTHAIYA
                  (Mudaliar), a Minister in the Dr. P. SUBBARAYAN’S
                  Independent Government, implemented the Communal
                  Reservation scheme of the Justice Party.
1928            * Periyar published an English magazine under the title “Revolt”
                  on 7-11-1928.
1929            * The first provincial conference of Self-Respect Movement was
                  organised by Periyar at Chengalpattu in February 1929. Mr.
                  W.P.A. Soundara Pandian, presided over that conference.
1929            * Periyar introduced a new rationalist marriage system called
                  ‘Self-Respect Marriage’. While conducting it, all the religious
                  rituals and uttering of ‘Mantras’ by Brahmins in Sanskrit should
                  be forbidden. It would be enough for the new couple to garland
                  each other and declare the wedding affirmation in mother-
                  tongue. The marriage should not be arranged pompously but
                  should be very economic. These are the conditions laid down by
                  Periyar for his reformatory wedlock system. By this new
                  matrimonial arrangement, he has secularized the marriage. Any
                  person irrespective of any religion could conduct the marriage by
                  asking the bride and the bridegroom to exchange garlands and
                  make a declaration for becoming life-partners.
                * Besides this new wedding system, Periyar also encouraged inter-
                  caste marriages and widow marriages.
                FIRST FOREIGN JOURNEY TO MALAYA
1929 Dec-15     * On invitation from Tamilians in Malaya Country (now
                  Malaysia), Periyar started his voyage in a ship from
                  Nagapattinam. He was accompanied by his wife Nagammal and
                  some other followers.
       Dec. 20: * At Penang harbour, rejoicing reception was accorded to Periyar
                  and his group by more than 50,000 Malay Tamils.
       Dec. 23: * At IPOH (Malaysia), Periyar inaugurated the Tamils Conference
                  convened by the Tamils Reformatory Sangam.
       Dec. 26: * At Singapore, warm welcome was given to Periyar and his
                  group. He addressed the conference organised by Malaya Indian
                  Congress. (Then Singapore was a province of Malaya nation
                  under the British rule. Now it is an independent souvereign
                  State)
               * He addressed many meetings at various places like Kualalumpur,
                 Taeiping, Malacca, Sungeipattani etc., propagating the principles
                 of the ‘Self-Respect Movement’.
1930 Jan-16    * Periyar and his group returned from Malaya to Tamil Nadu.
               * As a pioneer, Periyar published his book on ‘Family Planning’
                 (Birth Control) and propagated restriction of number of children.
                 He was the first rationalist leader and author of a book in India,
                 who stressed the prime need of Family Planning even before the
                 Government of India implemented that scheme.
May 10, 11:    * At Erode, the Second Provincial Conference of the Self Respect
                 Movement was convened by Periyar under the chairmanship of
                 Mr. M.R. Jayakar, a rationalist leader from Pune. Youth
                 conference, Women’s conference, Prohibition of Liquor
                 Conference, Tamil Music patronage conference were also
                 conducted there at that time.
               * He actively supported the Bill for the abolition of Devadasi
                 system (setting apart young girls from a particular community
                 playing musical instruments in Hindu temples as dancing girls).
                  Dr. Muthulakshmi (Reddy) a woman reformer brought that Bill
                  which was passed in the Madras Legislative Council despite
                  stout opposition by the caste-fanatic Brahmin leaders.
1931 Dec 13    * Periyar started his Journey to Europe from Chennai harbour by
                 ship. Mr. S. Ramanathan and Mr. Raju of Erode accompanied
                 him.
1932           * He visited many European Countries like Egypt, Greek, Turkey,
                 Soviet Russia, Germany, England (Britain), Italy, Spain, France,
                 Portugal etc.,
               * At Berlin, capital of Germany, Periyar visited several Socialist
                 Associations and offices of Socialist magazines.
               * In Russia (formerly Soviet Union) his stay was extended for a
                 lengthy period of three months because he was invited to
                  address many workers’ meetings. Being the First Nation of Karl
                  Marx’s Communism, established by the great leader Mr. Lenin,
                  the former Soviet Union (Russia) captivated very much the heart
                  of Periyar.
1932 June 20 * In England (Britain) Periyar addressed a huge labourers’ public
               meeting with more than 50,000 people. He explained his
               principles on Rationalism as well as Socialism.
       Nov. 11 * Returned to Erode after completing the European journey via
                 Colombo, Capital of Ceylon (Srilanka).
1932 Dec 28-29 *     In Erode at the residence of Periyar, a plan of Socialist
               Programme drafted by the great thinker Comrade M.
               SINGARAVELU was discussed by the followers of Self-
               Respect Movement.
1932           * Periyar addressed many meetings throughout Tamil Nadu,
                 propagating the ‘Erode Plan of Socialism’.
1933 May 11: * Mrs. E.V.R. Nagammal, the beloved wife of Periyar passed
               away and the burial took place the very next day.
               * On 12-5-1933, he immediately left for Tiruchirappalli where he
                 conducted an Inter-religious (Christian) Self-Respect Marriage
                 defying the section 144 promulgated in this connection and got
                 arrested.
       Nov. 26: * Periyar convened the conference of Self-Respect and Socialism
                  at Erode.
1933           * Because of the repression by the British Rule, ‘Kudi Arasu’ -
                 Tamil Weekly was banned. Another magazine ‘Puratchi’
                 (Revolution) was published by Periyar.
1933 Dec - 30:* Periyar and his sister Kannammal were arrested and awarded
                imprisonment for an editorial in ‘Kudi Arasu’ weekly.
1934           * The reputed Socialist leader later known as ‘Lok Nayak’ JAYA
                 PRAKASH NARAYAN met Periyar at his residence and
                 requested him to join the Socialist Party (Founded by Jaya
                 Prakash).
1934           * He brought out the Tamil weekly ‘Pagutharivu’ (Rationalism) on
                 12-1-1934.
1935           * Periyar began to extend his support to the Justice Party. It started
                 the Tamil weekly paper “Viduthalai” on 1-6-1935. Then it was
                 entrusted to Periyar who published ‘Viduthalai’ as Tamil Daily
                 Newspaper from 1-1-1937.
            *    From 13-1-1935 Periyar’s Reform of Alphabets in Tamil
                 language was adopted in all the papers and books published by
                 him.
1936        *    In the conference held at Kanchipuram he arranged a resolution
                 to be passed to oppose Hindi imposition.
1937        *    Periyar published ‘Viduthalai’ as a Tamil Daily Newspaper from
                 1-1-1937 undertaking its ownership.
            *    Having become the Prime Minister of the former composite
                 Madras Province, Mr. C. Rajagopala Achariyar announced that
                 Hindi would be made a compulsory subject in school
                 curriculum.
1937 Dec. 26 *   At Truchirappalli, ‘Tamils Conferance’ was convened. There
                 Periyar declared that to defeat the dominance of Hindi over
                 Tamil and Dravidian race, the only solution would be ‘A
                 separate Souvereign State’ ie., ‘Tamil Nadu for Tamils’.
1938        *    In his book entitled as “The world to come” Periyar visuvalised
                 many scientific inventions including the possibility of the “Test
                 Tube Baby” which is now a reality!
            *    Periyar opposed the introduction of compulsory Hindi in schools
                 by Mr. C. Rajagopala Achariyar (Rajaji) as Prime Minister of
                 Madras Presidency who had earlier announced its introduction
                 on 25-2-1938 but he actually introduced it on 23-4-1938. Periyar
                 began to picket in front of the Hindu Theological School,
                 Chennai from 4-6-1938 where Hindi was introduced as
                 compulsory. He courted arrest and was sentenced on 6-12-1938
                 to undergo imprisonment for 2 years. He was lodged in the Govt.
                 Central prison at Madras (now Chennai) and then he was
                 transferred to the Bellary Jail (Andhra).
            *    While launching that agitation Periyar announced that Mr. C.N.
                 ANNADURAI (Former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu) would be
                 the First General in leading the picketing against Hindi.
            *    On 29-12-1938 Periyar was elected President of the Justice Party
                 even when he was in Bellary Jail (Andhra).
            *    The title “Periyar” was conferred on him by Tamil Nadu Women
                 Conference held in Madras on 13-11-1938 under the
                  presidentship of NEELAMBIGAI AMMAIYAAR daughter of
                  MARAIMALAI ADIGAL, a veteran pure Tamil Scholar.
1940         *    He toured North India where he met Dr. B.R. AMBEDKAR and
                  MOHAMMED ALI JINNAH in Bombay. Mr. C.N.
                  ANNADURAI (affectionately called as ‘Anna’), accompanied
                  him.
             *    When the Congress party Ministry of Mr. C. Rajagopala
                  Achariar resigned Periyar was invited by MR. ARTHUR HOPE
                  Governor of Madras to form alternative Ministry since he was
                  elected the leader of the Justice Party.
                  But to concentrate fully on Social Reformation only, he rejected
                  that enviable political offer.
1940         *    He raked up the issue of the demand for a separate Dravida Nadu
                  to save Dravidian race and Tamil language from the dominance
                  of Hindi and North Indian Hindu Capitalists at Thiruvarur
                  Conference.
1944         *    On 27-8-1944 the name of the Justice Party was changed as
                  ‘Dravidar Kazhagam’ to signify purely as a social revolutionary
                  movement for the emancipation of Dravidian race oppressed by
                  Brahmins at the Provincial (special) Justice Party conference
                  held at Salem and also not to contest elections and accept the
                  titles given by British Govt.
1946         *    On 11-5-1946, the famous “Blackshirts Conference” was held on
                  the sands of the River Vaigai in Madurai when the conference
                  pandal was set on fire by Brahmin - instigated hooligans. Periyar
                  and his followers were stranded for the whole day.
1947 Aug - 15 *   When the whole of India and the world were jubilant on the
                  attainment of Indian “Independence” on 15-8-1947, Periyar
                  boldly called it a ‘mourning’ day for Tamils with foresight. He
                  called Independence of India was nothing but a ‘made over’ to
                  Brahmins and North Indian Merchants (Baniyas) from British
                  because the demand for separate sovereign nation to Dravidian
                  Tamils was not fulfilled as done in the case of Muslims’ demand
                  for Pakistan.
1947         *    On 14-9-1947, the Dravida Nadu separation conference was held
                  at a moffusil town, Cuddalore.
1948         *    The Blackshirts volunteer corps was banned by the Congress
                  Government. The 18th Dravidar Kazhagam’s State Conference
                  was held at Tuticorn on 8-5-1948 and 9-5-1948 under the
                  presidentship of Periyar when many thousands of Periyar’s
                  followers assembled, irrespective of Caste and Religion.
             *    Periyar and Mr. C.N. Annadurai (‘Anna’) participated in the
                  Anti-Hindi Volunteers Conference held under the leadership of
                  Maraimalai Adigalar (the Champion for purity of Tamil) in
                  Chennai.
             *    On 30-1-1948 Mr. Mahathma Gandhi fell a victim to the bullets
                  of assassin Nathuram Godse, a Marathi Brahmin at New Delhi at
                  his prayer meeting. Periyar condemned the assasination at all
                  meetings held thereafter in Tamil Nadu. He suggested that India
                  be named as “Gandhi Nation (Nadu)”, a new religion with
                  rationalism may be created as “Gandhi Religion” to mark his
                  martyrdom.
1948 Aug - 10 *   The second Anti-Hindi Agitation started at Kumbakonam on 10-
                  8-1948 on the directive of Periyar.
1948 Aug - 22 *   It was decided to show Black Flags to Mr.C.Rajagopalachariar
                  when he visited Madras on 23-8-1948 as Governor General of
                  India. Periyar organised a Black flag demonstration and his
                  followers were arrested and kept in the central jail at Madras
                  (Chennai) from 22-8-1948 to 27-8-1948 and were released on
                  27-8-1948.
1949         *    Periyar’s marriage with Mani Ammai was held just to guard his
                  health as well as the Movement’s properties so that the
                  Reformation movement would go on in future without
                  stagnation.
1950         *    He declared the Republic Day, 26-1-1950, as a Mourning Day
                  for Tamils to condemn the oppressive rule of North Indian
                  Capitalist Hindi fanatics.
             *    On 22-01-1950 Periyar was sentenced to undergo imprisonment
                  for                the               publication               of
                  his book ‘Ponmozhigal’ (Golden sayings).
             *    The Communal G.O. (Government Order) which was very dear
                  to his heart was struck down as ultravires of the Constitution of
                  India by the Madras High Court which was confirmed by the
                  Supreme Court. Periyar roared like a lion, toured the whole of
                  Tamil Nadu and awoke the people to see the danger ahead.
1951   * Sensing the formidable opposition engineered by Periyar,
         Constitution of India was amended for the first time by the
         Nehru Govt. at the Centre. This was the first Amendment to the
         Indian Constitution. Ultimately sub clause (4), was added to the
         Article 15 to admit of the provisions of Communal G.O. to
         preserve the rights and equal opportunities of Backward classes
         of India.
1952   * Periyar opposed the scheme of New Elementary education on the
         basis of the parents hereditary occupation, introduced by the
         then Chief-Minister Mr. C. Rajagopalachari (Rajaji).
       * Periyar and his followers erased with tar the Hindi-name-Boards
         in all Railway stations all over Tamil Nadu.
1953   * In order to condemn idolatary worship and to show to the world
         that there was no divine power in idols, he organised a
         campaign. His followers and himself broke the idol of
         PILLAIYAR (Vinayaga) at public places.
       * The intensity of Periyar’s opposition against the educational
         reform-programme of Rajaji according to which all students
         should learn in schools their parents’ profession was so
         formidable that made Mr. C. Rajagopala Achari (Rajaji) to quit
         the post of Chief - Minisrer. The indignation of Dravidian Race-
         Members of Legislative Assembly (M.L.A.s) also added fire to
         his downful. (Rajaji) to quit the post of Chief-Minister.
         Consequently MR. K. KAMARAJ came to power as Chief-
         Minister of Tamil Nadu and he cancelled the much opposed
         educational reform as advocated by Periyar.
1954   * Periyar convened the Conference on Buddhism at Erode.
       * Periyar along with his wife and some friends visited Myanmar
         (Burma) and Malaysia. At Mandalay (Myanmar) he attended the
         World Buddhist Conference where he met Mr. Mallala Sekara, a
         Buddhist Scholar and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. He conversed with
         the latter for a long time and the subject of conversion to
         Buddhism came up for the discussion. He strongly advised Dr.
         B.R. Ambedkar not to leave Hinduism; because by his
         conversion to Buddhism he would forfeit his right to criticise
         Hinduism and its untouchability.
         Periyar did not prefer conversion so that he could sustain the
         right to condemn the evils of Hindu religion.
1954 Dec        * Periyar undertook his second tour to Malaysia and propagated
                  his rationalistic principles in many places.
1955            * After returning to Tamil Naadu Periyar announced and fixed a
                  date to set fire to the Indian National Flag in protest against the
                  compulsory scheme of imposition of Hindi in Tamil Nadu, much
                  against the wishes of the people.
                * Periyar was arrested for his public agitation of burning the
                  pictures of Rama - a Hindu deity at all public places, as a
                  symbolic protest against the Aryan domination and degradation
                  of the Dravidian leaders according to the Ramayana epic.
                * The Trichi District Collector Mr. R.S. Malayappan a
                  sympathizer of the Untouchables was given wantonly strictures
                  in a judgement of the Madras High Court by two Brahmin
                  Judges. Periyar exposed this judgement since R.S. Malayappan
                  was an Offficer from a Backward community. Periyar criticised
                  the High Court judges for their hatred towards the depressed
                  class officers in a public meeting held at Trichi Town Hall
                  Square.
1957 Jan - 18 * The historic meeting between PERIYAR and VINOBA
                  BHAVE, the Founder-leader of ‘Land Donation Movement’
                  took place at Tiruchirappalli.
1957 April - 23 * For criticising the judgement of Madras High Court delivered by
                  two Brahmin Judges in the case of Trichi District Collector Mr.
                  R.S. Malayappan, Periyar was charged with contempt of court
                  and when the final hearing was heard (Before the judges Justice
                  P.V. Rajamannar and Justice A.S. Panchapakesa Iyer) he made a
                  statement in the High Court, explaining how Brahmins
                  conducted themselves with racial motive in several cases and
                  opined that it was their inborn natural ‘Dharma’ (Divine Duty) to
                  annihilate uprising Shudras and Panchamas of Dravidian Race.
                * Probably this was then the first time that the judgement of High
                  Court Judges came to be criticised publicly for which Periyar
                  and his wife E.V.R. Maniammai were convicted.
1957            * On 3-11-1957 at Thanjavur a big conference was held to weigh
                  Periyar against silver coins to commemorate his birthday.
                * On the same day a resolution was passed calling upon the people
                  of Tamil Nadu to come forward to burn the excerpt of Articles in
                  the Constitution of India on 26-11-1957 as a protest against the
           inclusion of Article supporting casteism. Some 10,000 people
           burnt the excerpts of the Constitution of India. Only about 3000
           of them were arrested and sentenced to undergo imprisonment
           from 6 months to 3 years Rigorous Imprisonment. This agitation
           rocked the whole of Tamil Nadu and that was the first time that
           such a big agitation against casteism was started. Some 15 to 18
           persons died in and out of jail due to incarceration (A special act
           was passed to convict them).
1958   *   Against the caste system, another big agitation was started by
           Periyar. Brahmins used to inscribe the name in their Hotel-
           Name-Boards as ‘Brahmin Hotel’ to spread the impression that
           Brahmins were superior caste. Periyar requested all his followers
           to erase the name ‘Brahmin’ in the Hotel Name Boards.
           Accordingly a compaign was started to erase the Brahmin-
           Name-Board in all Brahmin Hotels in Tamil Nadu. As a result of
           this agitation, the name ‘Brahmin’ in the hotel-name-boards
           disappeared.
       *   Periyar was arrested as a case was foisted on him by the Govt. of
           Tamil Nadu that he exhorted his followers to physically attack
           the Brahmins in his speeches delivered at Pasupathipalayam
           (Karur), Kulitalai and Tiruchirapalli and was sentenced to
           undergo imprisonment for 6 months by the District Sessions
           Court at Tiruchirapalli.
       *   Periyar and Ram Manohar Lohia, the Socialist leader of North
           India, met at Chennai and discussed their social and political
           service to the people.
1959   *   He undertook a tour of North India addressing meetings at
           Kanpur, Lucknow, New Delhi and other places.
1960   *   He burnt the map of India excluding Tamil Nadu, explaining that
           the Central Government Raj (Rule) is a Brahmin Raj.
       *   A protest day was observed by Periyar all over Tamil Nadu
           against the Supreme Court judgement which had crippled the
           operation of the Tamil Nadu Land Ceiling Act which was
           rectified by Amendment to the Constitution.
1967   *   Mr. C.N. ANNADURAI became the Chief-Minister of Tamil
           Nadu, his party (DMK) having secured the majority of seats in
           the Tamil Nadu Assembly. He went to Tiruchirappalli and
           sought Periyar’s greetings, goodwill and advice.
               * Periyar decided to extend his support to the D.M.K. Ministry.
                 Mr. C.N. Annadurai declared in the State Assembly that he
                 dedicated his ‘Ministry’ to Periyar. He also enacted the Self-
                 Respect Marriage Act legalising all the marriages so far
                 conducted on Self-Respect Marriage System devoid of rituals.
               * Mr. C.N. Annadurai, a lieutenant of Periyar, brought a
                 legislation renaming Madras State as Tamil Nadu State and also
                 introducing the two language formula (Tamil and English) for
                 Tamil Nadu, instead of the 3 language formula prescribed by the
                 Central Govt. then. These three achievements are the mile stones
                 of his ministry.
1968           * As a true rationalist disciple of Periyar the Chief Minister
                 ANNA directed to throw away the pictures of all Hindu deities
                 from the Govt. offices through a circular signed by the then
                 Brahmin Chief Secretary.
1968           * Periyar observed a day for “Condemnation of the exploitation of
                 North Indian Business Magnates”.
               * He was invited to address Minorities Conference at Lucknow
                 (Capital of Utter Pradesh province).
               * The Ramayana, Epic of Aryans, was burnt all over Tamil Nadu
                 as a mark of protest against cruel treatment of Dravidians by the
                 Aryans in the Ramayana.
1969 Feb - 3   * Chief Minister ANNA expired. Periyar plunged into profound
                 grief and expressed that the future of entire Tamil Nadu had
                 become darkened due to the demise of ANNA.
1969           * Periyar announced a Programme of agitation to enter the
                 Sanctum Sanctorum of temples to eradicate               the caste
                 discrimination practised, according to which only Brahmins
                 could become Archakas (Priests) and perform worship (poojas)
                 in Sanskrit language only instead of Tamil.
1970           * The Tamil Bi-monthly, the “Unmai” (Truth) was first started at
                 Tiruchirapalli by Periyar. First issue was released by Dr. K.
                 Veeramani, then General Secretary of Dravidar Kazhagam.
               * The UNESCO, an international branch organisation of the
                 United Nations, conferred on Periyar a glorious title, the citation
                 of which read as “Periyar the prophet of New Age, Socrates of
                 South East Asia, Father of the social Reform Movement, and
                 Arch enemy of ignorance, superstitions, meaningless customs
                  and baseless manners” - UNESCO 27-6-1970. The award was
                  presented by the Union Education Minister Dr. TRIGUNA SEN
                  under the presidentship of Chief Minister KALAINGAR M.
                  KARUNANIDHI.
              *   Periyar inagurated a new forum, called the Rationalist Forum, a
                  non-political social organisation, enlisting the Government and
                  private Employees and also others who subscribe to the views of
                  “Rationalism”.
              *   A legislation was passed in the Tamil Nadu Legislative
                  Assembly, enabling persons belonging to all castes to become
                  Archakas (Priests) in Temples. Periyar demanded such a
                  legislation, to abolish castes and to establish equality of persons
                  irrespective of caste at all places.
              *   Periyar inaugurated the English monthly, the “Modern
                  Rationalist”, the need for which was keenly felt by English
                  knowing Rationalists.
1970 Nov-1:   *   Mumbai (formerly Bombay) Dravidar Kazhagam arranged
                  Birth-Day Celebrations for Periyar (September 17) and Anna
                  (Sep. 15). Accompanied by EVR Mani Ammai and General
                  Secretary of Dravidar Kazhagam Mr. K. Veeramani, Thanthai
                  Periyar travelled in his van from Chennai and attended the above
                  two functions besides some more meetings in Mumbai for three
                  days from First November, 1970.
1971 Mar:     * After the 1971 Assembly election to Tamil Nadu, the new
                D.M.K. Ministry was sworn in under the Chief Ministership of
                Kalaignar M. Karunanidhi.
              * Thanthai Periyar graced that grand function. After assuming
                charge of Ministership, every Minister came before Periyar and
                received his hearty greetings.
1971 Sep-17: * At Erode, the home-town of Periyar, his statue was unveiled by
               the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu Hon. Kalaignar M.
               Karunanidhi. Revered Kundrakudi Adigalar Dheivasigamani
               presided over that function.
1971 Nov-11: * At Salem, a splendid function was held. A throne of silver was
               presented to Periyar by the Public of Salem.
1972 Aug-13: * At Cuddalore, the statue of Periyar was unveiled by the Chief
               Minister of Tamil Nadu, Hon. M. Karunanidhi. The Chairman of
                  the Legislative Council Mr. C.P. Chitrarasu presided over the
                  function.
1973 Sep-16,17: *      Periyar happily participated in his 95th Birth-Day
                Celebrations. The Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam
                (A.D.M.K.) General Secretary M.G. RAMACHANDRAN
                offered laurels and a purse to Periyar.
1973 Sep-30: * A huge ‘Conference of Blackshirts’ was conducted at Madurai
               City. The statue of Thanthai Periyar was unveiled by
               Tamil Nadu Minister Naavalar Dr. V.R. NEDUNCHEZHIAN
               under the Chairmanship of Minister PANRUTI S.
               RAMACHANDRAN.
1973 Dec. 8, 9: * As his last agitational social service, Periyar convened the
                  ‘Conference for Eradication of Social Degradation’ with extreme
                  enthusiasm at Periyar Thidal, Chennai - 600 007. Many historic
                  resolutions were then passed. On the 2nd day of that conference,
                  Periyar made a clarion call to all Tamilians to strive hard for the
                  abolition of casteism and social degradation imposed by
                  Brahmins.
1973 Dec. 19: * At Thiyagaraya Nagar, Chennai - Periyar delivered his last but
                immortal speech (the Swansong) like an ever memorable dying
                declaration.
1973 Dec. 20: * Due to unbearable acute pain of Hernia disease - Periyar was
                admitted in the Government General Hospital in Chennai.
1973 Dec. 21: * On his wish Periyar was taken to the Christian Medical College
                (C.M.C.) Hospital at Vellore.
1973 Dec. 24: * The Greatest Original Thinker and the Resolute Rationalist of
                the World, Periyar, breathed his last, putting billions of
                rationalists, Tamilians of Dravidian race and admirers all over
                the globe into unbearable agony with ocean of tears.
                * An official State mourning was announced by the Chief-Minister
                  Kalaingar M. Karunanidhi and Gazette extraordinary was issued
                  by the Govt. of Tamil Nadu.
1973 Dec. 25: * A state funeral with police honours was arranged at Madras. His
                body was kept in the Rajaji Hall for the public to pay their
                respects when dignitaries, his followers, friends, and a host of
                others assembled in millions. The funeral procession started in
                 the evening and reached the Periyar Thidal at Vepery, Chennai -
                 600 007 where his body was laid to rest. Leaders like former
                 Chief                                                   Minister
                 Mr. K. Kamaraj and Kalaignar Karunanidhi were by the side of
                 the body till the burial. A Govt. holiday was declared on 24-12-
                 1973 by the State Govt of Tamil Nadu.
1974 Jan 6     : After Periyar’s death Mrs. E.V.R. Maniammai headed this Social
                 Revolutionary Movement (Dravidar Kazhagam) and lived upto
                 1978.
1978 March 16 : Mrs. EVR Maniammal passed away.
1978 March 17 : Then Mr. K. Veeramani, who was nominated            as General
                Secretary by Periyar in 1960, continued as the Secretary General
                of the movement and still he carries the torch.
               * He has established numerous institutions as permanent
                 Memorials to the Greatest Universal Rationalist Thinker -
                 PERIYAR
                 E.V. RAMASAMY.
               * As an ardent disciple of that revolutionary leader in upholding
                 his                                                   principles,
                 Mr. K. Veeramani, the President of Dravidar Kazhagam has
                 founded ‘PERIYAR CENTRE’ in NEW DELHI, the capital of
                 INDIA.

                                     - By POET DR. A. MARAIMALAIYAAN



(Taken from the ‘Collected Works of Periyar E.V.R’
Compiled by Dr.K.Veeramani
The Periyar Self-Respect Propaganda institution
Periyar Thidal
50,E.V.K, Sampath Road
Vepery – Chennai 600 007
Third Edition - 2005
